In the abstract, open source blockchain networks such as Ethereum and Bitcoin are

kits that allow you to pop up an economic system in software, complete with account management and a native unit of exchange to pass between accounts. Kind of like
the game Monopoly. People call these native units of exchange coins, tokens, or cryptocurrencies, but they’re no different from tokens in any other system: they’re a form of money (or scrip) that is usable only within that system.
Blockchains work something like mesh networks or local area networks (LANs); they are merely connected to other “peer” computers running the same software. When you want to make one of these peer-to-peer (P2P) networks accessible through a web browser, you need to use special software libraries such as Web3.js to connect an application’s front end (the GUI you see in a browser), via JavaScript APIs, to its back end (the blockchain).
In Ethereum, you can take this concept one step further by easily writing financial contracts with other users inside the system. As you’ll see, these financial contracts are called smart contracts.
The key component is this idea of a Turing-complete blockchain. ... As a data structure, it works kind of the same way that Bitcoin works, except the difference in Ethereum is, it has this built-in programming language.
—Vitalik Buterin, inventor of Ethereum3
In Ethereum, smart contracts are written in the programming language Solidity, which you’ll learn about in Chapter 4. Turing completeness was an advantage that many developers quickly latched onto, but more important is Ethereum’s ability to save state. In computing, a simple definition of a stateful system is one that can detect changes to information and remember them over time.
1Ethereum Blog, “Visions, Part 1: The Value of Blockchain Technology,” https://blog. Ethereum.org/2015/04/13/visions-part-1-the-value-of-blockchain-technology/, 2015. 2American Banker, “Blockchain Won’t Make Banks Any Nimbler,” www.americanbanker.com/ bankthink/blockchain-wont-make-banks-any-nimbler-1079190-1.html, 2016.
3YouTube, “Technologies That Will Decentralize the World,” www.youtube.com/watch?v= er-k3ehpFaM&feature=share, 2016.
 2
Chapter 1 ■ Bridging the BloCkChain knowledge gap
Imagine a computer with no hard drive; you couldn’t do much with it. It would be like a calculator, the contents of its memory fleeting. The ability to engineer interactions between users in the future, and under certain conditions, is a powerful addition to a blockchain. It allows developers to introduce control flow into cryptocurrency transaction programming. This is the biggest distinction between Ethereum and Bitcoin, but not the only one, as you’ll see.
■ Note Control flow refers to the order in which computing instructions are executed or evaluated. examples are conditional statements (if this, then that) and loops (which run repeatedly until certain conditions are met).
In Bitcoin, all transactions happen as soon as possible. Because of Bitcoin’s lack of statefulness, it has to execute transactions all in one go. The blockchain as envisioned by Bitcoin’s creator(s) was a distributed transaction ledger that kept a running tally of everyone’s bitcoin balances in the network. (A stylistic note for close readers: Bitcoin the network is written in the uppercase, and bitcoin the token in lowercase.) In Ethereum, a similar system is made extensible in a standardized way.
Secondarily, this common scripting language makes it more straightforward for blockchains that share the Ethereum protocol to share data with one another, enabling groups that use separate blockchains to share information and value with each other.
